Introduction  {#PagIntro}
===========
\tableofcontents

It's state-of-the-art in software development to write and edit the
documentation context inside the source code. The programmer(s) can
adapt the documentation on each improvement or bug fix at one place.
All work is done in the source file(s), the documentation is placed in
special comments in the source code so that the compiler doesn't see
them. Beside the compiler, which extracts information for the CPU, an
additional tool-chain is used to parse the special comments and the
related source code to build the documentation, avoiding redundand
data in separate files and keeping comments to a minimal size.

Powerful tool-chains (back-ends) exist for several programming
languages (like C) to generate output in different formats (ie like
*html*, *pdf*, *man-pages* and others). But previous to fb-doc
there is nothing for FreeBasic source code yet.

Rather than being a complete tool-chain fb-doc is designed as a bridge
to existing C back-ends, since it's a lot of work to build and test
such a complete tool-chain for several output formats and keep it up to
date. Instead fb-doc creates an intermediate format (similar to the FB
source code, but with C-like syntax) that can be used with existing,
well developed and tested C documenting back-ends. fb-doc has been
tested with
- [gtk-doc](http://developer.gnome.org/gtk-doc-manual/stable/index.html)
- [Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.org/)
The later is used for this documentation.

The steps to generate a well documented project are
-# generate source code, compile and test it
-# add documentation comments inside the source code and keep them up
   to date
-# run fb-doc on the FreeBasic source code to build a C-like
   intermediate format
-# run the C-back-end on the intemediate format to build the
   documentation output in one or more output formats (ie \em html,
   \em pdf, \em manpage, ...)

This intermediate format doesn't contain complete C source and
cannot get compiled by a C compiler. Instead it just contains all
information the lexical scanner of the back-end needs to build the
documentation output. Therefor fb-doc itself doesn't parse the complete
FreeBasic source code. Instead it also acts as a lexical scanner to
extract just the necessary information.

\note That's why fb-doc shouldn't be executed on buggy source (be
       prepared to face fancy output in that case).


fb-doc  {#SecIntFbdoc}
======

fb-doc is a multi functional tool, supporting the complete process of
documenting FB source code. You can use it at the command line and
manually control its operations by individual command line options.
It's also designed to operate as an automated tool to act

- in a *Makefile*,
- as a filter for *Doxygen* or
- as a custom command for *Geany*.

Several run modes control where to get input from and where to write
output at. Several emitters are available do generate different kinds
of output. Each run mode has its default emitter, but an individual
emitter can be selected instead. A plugin system makes it possible to
extend fb-doc by external emitters.

All this gets controlled by the command line interface. It may be a bit
overhelming at the beginning. It's recommended to concentrate on the
examples to get startet.


Documentation Context  {#SecIntDocu}
=====================

The documentation context gets build from the FB source code and its
surrounding comments. fb-doc exports both in a C-like intermediate
format as input for the used back-end.

Not all comments get exported. Only comments starting with a magic
character are used to build the documentation, see \ref SecExaComments
for details.

Also, not all FB source code gets exported. The output is reduced to
the minimal set of constructs to build the documentation, see \ref
SecEmmCSource for details. This makes the execution of the
tool-chain faster and avoids confusion due to the foreign language for
the lexical scanner.

This constructs and their comments get emitted at the same line number
in the intermediate format to enable the tool-chain referencing to a
certain line.


About this Text  {#SecIntSelf}
===============

And finally some words about this documentation (the text you're
currently reading). It is generated by Doxygen back-end with fb-doc
filter. Find examples for a lot of topics by studying the files in the
folder *src* of the fb-doc package. Beside this you may want to check
the files in the folder *doc*. configurations for Doxygen to extract
this pages. A good start may be to use these files and create your
customized fb-doc documentation and play around with the parameters,
see \ref SecExaCli.

To be honest: in some cases this documentation may be a bit
overloaded and serve more information than necessary. But one of the
reasons for creating it is to demonstrate the features of fb-doc and
Doxygen. Therefor not all possibilities are used to reduce the
output to the essentials (see the Doxygen manual for details).

\note It's not under the scope of this documentation to describe the
       usage of any (or all possible) tool-chain(s). Please refer to
       the respective manual(s) for further information.
